>> Good afternoon everybody.
I'm Chris Espinosa of the Xcode
team and I want to welcome you
to Unleashing the Power of the Xcode Build System.
We have a good session for you this afternoon.
We're going to take you on a tour of the dark
under belly of the Xcode Build System.
You'll learn a couple of important things.
One is the new features in the Xcode 3.0 Build
System that will allow you to build faster
and add more customization to your projects.
And two is we're going to show you how to
tune customized projects to build faster.
I'm going to give you tips on building
for multiple architectures,
how and when to use the new feature
called Parallel Target Builds.
How to tune your builds by managing your precompiled
headers so you build fewer and better precompiled headers.
How to use some of the new build settings in
order to embed frameworks in your applications
or to use an embedded framework for multiple applications.
How to create and use your own SDKs
and integrate them with Apple's SDKs
so you can build against multiple SDKs at the same time.
How to build the same project in an Xcode 2.5
and 3.0 even on the same machine.
And also how to use Tiger's gnu tools
when you're running on a Leopard system.
It's a lot to cover.
It's going to be very detailed
And so I hope you take a lot of notes.
But before I can explain any of that, I have to get on some
common ground with some terminology and give you an overview
of the main areas of the build system
we're going to be talking about today.
An Xcode project is a set of targets.
And a target builds a build product.
And when I'm talking about the build system, I'm talking
about taking a target and building its, taking a project
and building its targets in sequence
to create build prod, build products.
Now each target is a clump.
And it's a clump of inputs.
Source files, nib files, build
settings, all sorts of things.
In order for Xcode to have a methodical way to build a
target into a build product, it has to organize this clump
of inputs and it organizes them into build phases.
I'm going to be talking really about only one build phase
today, the most important one which is compile source.
There are a lot of other build phases that copy your
resources or that run shell scripts or things like that.
But the main one is compiling and linking the source
files into executables that go into your build product.
The most important thing about build, build phases is
that they are the things that build settings effect.
When you change build settings in your project
or your targets, the build phases are the ones
that take those settings and put them to work.
The build settings inherit, they
inherit from the project to the target.
So you can set build settings at your project level
that will affect all of the targets in your project.
And so those settings that you set at your project
level, you'll really only want to set the ones
that are generally applicable to everything you're
building such as maybe the major version number or,
or some setting that you want to
use globally such as optimization.
What optimization you want to use or
the architectures you want to build for.
Things that are specific to a target like what kind
of target this is, what's its name, where does it go,
what specific build flags do I want to build it with.
You should set those at the target level.
Build settings then are used by the target
and applied to each build phase to build,
to produce an output from that build phase.
Okay? Now the build settings, you'll
see them in the build setting inspector.
Usually you'll just see a column of names and values.
If you command click on the build settings
inspector, you'll, you'll be able to control click
on it, you'll be able to see two other things.
You'll be able to see the build settings definition
which is the way it comes up with the value.
And you'll be able to see the build settings identifier
that looks kind of like an environment variable, okay?
So we have kind of two different
ways of viewing the build setting.
You can view is as an English name and a string
constant or you could view it as something that looks
like an environment variable with what looks like a
calculation behind it kind of like an Excel spreadsheet.
Build settings have definitions that evaluate to values.
They can be strings, they can be lists of
identifiers, they can be values, they can be Booleans.
Okay? And there are three basic groups of build settings.
The first kind are the predefined build settings.
These are the ones that we define in the Xcode
build setting for you to use generally.
We take the UNIX shell's environment variables and propagate
them through so you can use them like user and home.
We take things that the build systems invoked
with like action, just like in a Makefile.
But we also set constants in the, in the build settings.
So for example, if you were building the, the
debug configuration, of your product or tar,
your project or target, the configuration build
setting will be set to the value debug, okay?
The second kind of build settings
are the definable build settings.
These are build settings that you can
change in the build settings inspector
to make your project or target build the way you want it to.
Sometimes these have default values.
Sometimes these values are set by the template you created
the project or target from, sometimes they're just blank.
These are things like the product name,
things like the header search paths.
Things like the optimization level or things like
the architectures you are choosing to build for.
This is going to come up most importantly
in a couple of slides.
And then finally, you can create your own
build settings that look and work exactly
like Xcode's predefined build
settings or definable build settings.
And you can use these to pass values to
your compiled code or you can use them
to change the way other build settings are defined.
You can define a build setting in
terms of another build setting.
You can even link build settings
together by saying you know this Boolean,
the value of this Boolean build setting is equal
to the value of that Boolean build setting.
So when you set one, the other is automatically changed.
So when you're building for 64-bit, the build setting
that's most important is the architectures build setting.
Now you've heard us talk a lot the last couple of days
about building 64-bit code and building 64-bit applicatdions.
When you build 64-bit, it's thde same process,
but a different set of steps than building
for a single processor architecture.
Back in the day when we only had PowerPC,
when you built your Xcode project
or your project builder project
back then, only one thing happened.
The, you took your set of source files, you ran them through
the PowerPC compiler, they created a PowerPC binary
and it was copied into your application
bundle or your executable.
That's because the value of the architecture's
build settings arch was a single value ppc.
Well, nowadays, same sources, same kind of project, but
you take the source files and you build them four times.
Take every source file and you build it for PowerPC,
every source file, build it for Intel, every source file,
build it for PowerPC 64, every
source file, build it for X86_64.
Why does it do that?
Because you've set the value of architecture's
build setting to a list of ppc, ppc64, i386, X86_64,
and the compile sources build phase simple
iterates over that list, compiles every source file
for every architecture, links together for each architecture
and does this thing called lipo,
I didn't come up with the name.
To put all of the executables together in one binary.
Now the story is simple.
How do you build for 64-bit?
Well, Bertrand Serlet or Steve Jobs will tell
you just check this checkbox that says 64-bit right?
And then you build and then you get errors and warnings
and you fix those and you repeat until the errors
and warnings are gone and then you debug it until it works.
So that's the theory.
In practice, you want to do something so that building
for 64-bit doesn't have a severe effect on your workflow.
The severe effect on the workflow is that
if you compile every file four times,
it's going to take substantially
longer than compiling every file once.
And three of those compilations are going
to have no relevance to what you're trying
to do because they won't run on your machine.
So when you're building for 64-bit, it's important to set
the value for the architecture's build setting differently
on the desktop when you're debugging than for building
and deploying to people testing or using your product.
And we built some easy ways to do that and to manage
the side effects of that in to Xcode 3.0.
Here's what's behind the checkboxes.
If the value of the architectures build settings starts out
as a list of architecture identifiers, like ppc or x86_64,
the checkboxes have a certain set of meanings.
Notice that we don't have individual checkboxes
for individual architectures.
We are strongly implying, in case you don't get this
message, that you should not build for a single chip set.
You should build universal, universal 32-bit,
universal 64-bit, universal 4-way,
but still there are very, very few times when
you should build only Intel or only PowerPC.
You can of course just manually edit the architecture's
build setting as a text string and do whatever you want,
but when you're using the checkbox interface,
it really implies, you better be universal.
One way or the other.
So the checkbox in 32-bit means ppc i386.
The checkbox in 64-bit means ppc64 x86_64
and both checkboxes mean all four architectures.
Very simple.
Now if you've manually edited the
field and you have a mixed set,
that is you are building it then, then you'll get a dash.
So when you see a dash in that architectures
box, it means that you're building thin not fat
for that bit width, 32-bit, 64-bit.
So this is really good if you're building the
release configuration or the deployment configuration
or something that's going to go outside your group.
Because you want to build as many architectures as possible,
as many architectures as your code is written for,
to give to other people so your
application can run everywhere.
But you don't want to do that on your local machine.
You don't necessarily want to build all four
architectures every time you make a simple bug fix.
You just want to build for the architecture you're using now.
We've provided some pre-defined build
settings that will really help you do that.
Now one that has existed all along is NATIVE_ARCH.
NATIVE_ARCH is the native chip set of the
machine and typically it's been just ppc or i386.
Even when we started introducing 64-bit machines,
since we didn't have a full 64-bit model,
d
it stayed the 32-bit equivalen2t
of that 64-bit model.
You really shouldn't use NATIVE_ARCH, it could be confusing.
We've introduced a new pre-defined build setting called
NATIVE_ARCH_32_BIT, which has exactly the same value
and means exactly the same thing, but is a little clearer.
NATIVE_ARCH_32_BIT is a pre-defined
build setting that evaluates to ppc on a G3 or G4
or G5 and i386 on of course a lower core duo.
Very easy.
NATIVE_ARCH_64_bit is the
64-bit equivalent of that.
So regardless of what machine you're on, NATIVE_
ARCH_64_BIT will be ppc64 or x86_64.
It'll be the 64-bit version of that.
So if you want to build something that's going to
build fat, but just for the chip set you're on,
you set your architectures to NATIVE_ARCH_32_BIT,
NATIVE_ARCH_64_BIT and on PodwerPC machine,
that'll evaluate to ppc i386, ppc ppc64 and
on an Intel machine they'll get i386 x86_64.
So you'll be able to single processor, multiple-bit widths.
But if you really want to have a project that's going to
build with the best bit width on the machine I'm running on
and only build once, the build set
you want is called NATIVE_ARCH_ACTUAL.
NATIVE_ARCH_ACTUAL evaluates the actual chip
set of the actual machine of the actual process
of the actual bit width you're running on.
ppc or 64 or i386 or x86_64.
Now when you set the architecture's build
setting to one of these pre-defined values
or a list of these pre-defined values, you still get check
boxes, but the behavior of the checkboxes are different.
When you check and uncheck the boxes, it will change
them from set of pre-defined values to another set
of pre-defined values, it won't take
you back to the set of constants.
And they mean different things.
And when you have the checkboxes
set with the architecture's values
with pre-defined values, you will
always build one kind of thin.
It's really optimized for debugging.
So you really only want to do this
in your debug configuration.
32-bit check, when 32-bit is checked,
that means the value is native
arch or NATIVE_ARCH_32_BIT.
When 64-bit is checked, it means
that it's NATIVE_ARCH_64_BIT
and when both are checked, that
means its NATIVE_ARCH_ACTUAL.
So on your debug configuration you check
both checkboxes and you should build
for the best architecture thin on
any machine you're building on.
This is great if you're sharing the project among
multiple people with multiple different machines.
This way you don't have to go in and change the
architectures every time you open up the project,
in order to build for you machine, if the guy on the next
desk has a G5 and the woman in the next cubicle is working
on a core solo, all three of you can open the
same project, you'll build best for your machine,
no changes to your project file, no contention or
conflict in your SEM system when you check it back in.
Now when you have these build settings set, we give
you some other aids in the user interface in order
to use the different architectures that you're building
for if you happen to be building a release configuration.
Say you want to see both the PowerPC and the Intel assembly
code generated by a certain source file side by side.
Well you couldn't do that before, but in Xcode 3.0,
we have something on the next slide to do that.
On this slide, we have pre-architecture build settings.
When you have a configuration that
has multiple architectures,
you can also change any compilation related build setting
to be different for each architecture and you do it
with the little gear menu at the
bottom of the build setting page.
You select a build setting, you pull down the menu and you
can add a per-architecture setting for any architecture
to customize any build setting to have
different values for each architecture.
You can do this for SDKs.
For example, you may want to use the 10.5
SDK if you're building for a 64-bit,
but still use the 10.4 SDK if you're building for 32-bit
just because you want to restrict yourselves so those
to those APIs so you can run back on Tiger.
You may want to set the deployment target,
you may want to set optimization flags,
you may want to set anything compilation related you
can customize per-architecture in the user interface.
And then as I said, if you have a configuration that
has multiple architectures configured and you want
to see the effects of one of those architectures,
you can use the Set Active Architecture menu item
in the project menu and there's also an optional
tool bar item that you can just put in your tool bar.
To pick a single architecture for the operations of compile,
pre-process, show assembly code and fix and continue.
So if you happen to be, if you happen to have a source file
and you want to see how it looks both in Intel assembly code
and in PowerPC assembly code, you can Set Active
Architecture and show assembly code and you'll see one
and then Set Active Architecture to another
architecture, show assembly code again and you can look
at the assembly codes side by side without having to go and
edit your build settings and that's going to be really handy.
At the command line, you can do a similar thing.
If you're building using Xcode build command line
and you want to force a particular architecture,
you just put ARCHS equals and then the architecture list
after that and build settings set at the command line,
trump all build settings in the project and the target and
force the Xcode build system to use the value you set there
so if you just want to build one thin architecture
or if you want to build an alternate architecture
to what's already configured, you can do that at
command line just by forcing the build setting.
When you're using per-architecture build settings as
I showed a couple slides ago with the user interface,
if you happen to be using xcconfig files that allow you
to specify build settings in a text file in your project,
you can use this special bracket and arch equals notation
to specify per-architecture build
settings in your xcconfig file.
So if you're sharing a configuration file among
multiple targets which we highly recommend,
it's a great way to have to, to be able to make global
changes without having to go through and open a lot
of inspectors, you can use the bracket
arch equals value close bracket notation
to set per-architecture build settings
in your xcconfig files.
And then if you're using custom build settings,
if you have something that's being passed
through to say a shell script build phase or
you're expanding it into a preprocessor macro,
you can do that on a per-architecture basis simply
by using the calculated value, which is you know,
your flag underscore and then CURRENT_ARCH.
Each time Xcode goes to that compilation group,
it'll set current arch to a different value
and then it'll evaluate the value of debug ppc, debug
i386, separately and then it'll take that value and pass it
through to your build, to your shell script
build phase or in your preprocessor macro.
When you build with multiple architectures, one important
thing will happen, is that your builds will take longer.
You experienced this going universal, you'll
experience it again going 64-bit.
It's more and more important to improve
your build speed when you're building
for full 4-way PowerPC X86
32-bit, 64-bit.
I'm going to cover four important ways
to improve your build speed here today.
One is using all available processors.
This basically comes, well I'm not going to say free.
This basically comes for the small
cost of buying an 8-way Macintosh.
( laughter )
Comes for free in the software.
The second, which is most important, is to
make the best use of your precompiled headers.
The more you build the more precompiled
headers you're generating and the faster
and fewer you generate precompiled
headers, the faster your build will go.
Third is using the new multiple targets feature, parallel
targets feature in order to build multiple targets
in parallel and fourth is to use
our distributed build options
So as I said, building for multiple processors.
A lot of this was covered in Bertrand
Serlet's State of the Union for Mac OS X.
In Tiger and Leopard, we try whenever possible
to dispatch jobs to multiple processors
and in Xcode we do this primarily
with the compile sources build phase
which is the one where you're doing the most work.
It's the one where you're doing multiple architectures.
When you're compiling your sources, we will use all
processors available in order to do the compilation jobs.
If you are on a four processor or more machine,
we'll reserve one processor to handle the UI tasks
and everything else going on in your
system, so that Xcode remains responsive.
You can get your mail, you can do Spotlight
searches, we'll save you one processor for that.
But if you've got an 8-way machine, seven
GCC jobs are going to be going in parallel
and that will really help speed up your build.
Now in the Compile Sources phase is
parallel, but the other steps are choke points.
All the prerequisites to compilation
are going to be choke points.
They have to be done serially before
we can fan out and do the compile job
and one of those choke points is pre-compiling the headers
because the precompiled header is a
pre-requisite to doing any compilation whatsoever.
And so it follows that if you have to precompile
a header, you're slowing down the whole machine.
So try not to.
Now precompiled headers are interesting because
they are very sensitive to configuration.
You're going to need a separate precompiled header for
each language dialect that you're using, C, C++,
Objective-C, because the compiler interprets
the headers differently for each language.
You're going to need one for each architecture you build.
If you build four architectures, you're
going to need four precompiled headers.
You may need one for each target because for each prefix
file by name, we generate a different precompiled header
and you're going to need one for each variant you use.
If you do different compile flags that affect the way
that the headers are interpreted and preprocessed,
they'll generate a separate precompiled
header in those cases.
It's easy to see how one little target could generate
8, 12, 16, precompiled headers,
each of which are 32 megabytes in size.
That's a lot of data moving back and forth.
That can make your build sub-optimal.
The most important things you can do are
reduce the number of precompiled headers.
First use the same prefix file
over and over again if you can.
Instead of having a different named prefix
file that just pound includes Cocoa, Cocoa.h
or Carbon, Carbon.h, use the same prefix file.
If you use the same name, you will
cut the number of precompiled headers
in half if you follow all the other advice.
But the second is to reduce the number of different variants
you have to produce because of compiler flags you use
and it's really hard to tell how to, why you're having on
precompiled header on your system and then you go and build
and another precompiled header is generated..
What's that all about?
Well the secret is in, the secret is in this large string.
That's a MD5 hash of the settings we used to
generate the precompiled header and so you can see
that if there's a unique hash,
a unique header was generated.
Now all the question is, why was it
generated and the why is actually contained
in this secret filed called pch.gch.hash-criteria.
By looking inside that file, you'll be able to see what
caused Xcode to generate a different precompiled header
and to show you some useful techniques in
finding that out and fixing the problems,
here's Rick Ballard of the Xcode team with the demo.
>> Thanks Chris.
( applause )
So I've got a very simple project here with two targets
and this tool target builds the framework target
when you build it, they're related and I want to
see what I can do about improving my build time.
So I'm going to start out and see
what the current situation is.
Let's open up the build results window and I'm going to make
sure if you're not familiar with the build results window,
in the lower left or in the middle if you've got an
embedded editor showing there are these little buttons.
I'm going to make sure that this left most button is on.
That will show me all the build steps even after they've
occurred and I'm going to make sure that the third
to left button is on, which shows the build transcript.
That'll show me the underlying commands that Xcode is using.
So let's go ahead and build this project and you can see, it
build a precompiled header here from my framework target.
And then when it went to build the tool target
it built another precompiled header here.
So we're building that twice and this is a small project
so it built very quickly, but if this was a larger project
or it had more targets, that precompiled header generation
could be a substantial portion of the time of my build.
It's definitely a place to get some savings.
So let's look at how we can make these two targets build and
share one precompiled header instead of building it twice.
This is a neat little trick.
I'm going to first start out by selecting the precompiled
header, build step in the build log and since I've turned
on my complete build transcript, you can see
it's highlighted in the build transcript,
the actually command Xcode used
to precompile that prefix header.
The last thing on that line, you don't need to read
it here, but the last thing in the line is going
to be the actual precompiled header generated.
What I'm going to do here is I'm going to go launch file merge,
which is an application we ship in the develop folder.
If you go to developer, applications, utilities, file merge,
this will help me compare the two
files I want to look at in a nice way.
I'm going to go ahead go back to my project, select
the precompiled header directory it created.
Not the actual precompiled header file.
You can see there I've selected everything
up to the actual precompiled header
I'm just going to drag that, oops, just going to drag this
line into file merge, you could copy, paste it as well.
So that tells the file merge that I'm
going to want to compare that directory
with well let's select the other
precompiled header step and again,
the last line is the precompiled header it generated, I'm
going to select the directory, drag it right into file merge.
When I hit compare here, file merge is going to tell me what's
different about these two precompiled header directories.
Let's go ahead and do that.
And there are two things that are different here.
One is the actual precompiled header that's generated, but
the other says hash-criteria file that Chris told you about,
which tells us what the criteria was that made
Xcode decide it had to compile two of these.
So if I go ahead and double click
on this hash-criteria file,
there's one difference and that's this -DHWDEBUG flag.
Well that's just a preprocessor
define, a C preprocessor define.
I'm defining the HWDEBUG define and that's
because this project is using that as a debug flag
to do some extra logging when I'm in my debug configuration.
Well I'm only defining that for my framework
target, because my tool target either doesn't use
that same flag or doesn't want debug logging on.
I could add it to both to make them use the same
criteria or I can go back, I'm going to close file merge.
Close my build results and I'm going to look
at my build settings and my framework target
and look for the preprocessor to find I actually set.
So I could scroll through this list, but instead
I'm going to filter on preprocessor and you can see,
I'm defining a preprocessor macro
here but we provide a second setting
which is named preprocessor macros not
defined in the precompiled headers.
In this case, I don't need my personal debugging macro
defined when I'm pre-compiling the header so I can go ahead
and delete this preprocessor macro setting and
I can edit the preprocessor macros not used
in precompiled headers, add it to that setting.
Now when I build I'll still get
this preprocessor macro defined,
but it won't effect my precompiled header generation.
Let's see what effect that has.
I'm going to go back and clean out my build, build again.
You can see from my framework, it's building a
precompiled header but when it built the target
for the tool, it didn't rebuild a precompiled header.
That tool target is now sharing the same
precompiled header I built for my framework.
Can't tell on such a fast machine with such a small
project, but I probably just cut my build time in half.
This is a technique you can use to make
substantial savings in your own build times.
Back to you Chris.
>> Thanks Rick.
( applause )
So because building a precompiled header is a choke point
in building your target, it's really important to eliminate
that in order to get as much speed as possible in also in
reusing precompiled headers, shares space on your disk,
there's less swapping, there's less disk access.
It's all around better to try to use, share
as many precompiled headers as possible.
I mean think of a situation where you have
a project that's building 40 targets
that are all plug-ins and they're all identical.
If they all have their own prefix file and each
builds a precompiled header, that may be two
or three seconds per target to
build that precompiled header.
If you can eliminate that two or three seconds per
target that's several minutes shaved off your build.
Now even with that, there are other choke points.
Such as copying resources and linking and things like that
and when you build a project that has an aggregate target,
that is a target that simply says build this
target and then that target and then that target
and then that target, Xcode serializes that operation.
First it looks at the dependencies among
them then builds the prerequisites first
and then builds everything in order after that, one by one.
Now this is problematic because
you have, you most of the time,
you're not using all of the extra
processors in your machine.
Because they only build phases that can really use
those processors are the Compile Sources build,
the Compile Sources build phases.
All the other build phases are just going one by one by one.
In Xcode 3.0, we allow you
to do something very interesting.
You can check a checkbox in the project inspector and say,
I want to build my targets in parallel whenever possible.
And what that means is that after Xcode
determines the dependencies between targets
and builds the early ones first, it will build all
of the build phases of each target in parallel.
So that they can overlap and use as much processor
is as available at that time and that means
if one target is doing a copy files phase which is only
using one processor, because it's primarily disk bound
and not really processor bound, another target which is
heavily processor bound, building a lot of source code,
can be using the other six or seven
processors on the machine in order to do that.
You can see how in that project that built
40 targets for example, 40 plug-ins,
building those 40 plug-ins ser@ially, where each
one has a single source file, may take a long time.
But building those targets in groups of eight, when you can
compile all eight source files for eight targets in parallel
and then go on to the next one, will be much, much faster.
In order to make this work, you have to ensure
that your intertarget dependencies are rock solid.
Because this will expose hidden assumptions in your project.
If you happen to have a linear list of targets that are
always built in this order, when you check that checkbox,
sometimes this target might be
built first, just because we could.
If that target happens to depend on something that
needed to built earlier, that build is going to fail
and what's worse it's going to fail intermittently.
Because introducing parallelism
introduces non-deterministic behavior.
So you have to have your intertarget dependencies rock
solid before you turn on parallel targets or you're going
to get behavior that is non-deterministic
and sometimes erroneous.
On case we found is when one target used Yak to
build an intermediate C file out of a Yak file
and that C file was actually compiled by another
target, that didn't have a dependency back on the first
and so if that target happened to fire first, it looked for
the C file, the other target hadn't even run yet, it failed.
That's a place where the linear
structure of the project that used
to impose order didn't work when we went in parallel.
But once again, I think this is better demoed
than talked about and here's Rick again.
>> So to show you Parallel Target Builds, I'm going to demo
this with a neat little application called Colloquy,
it's a free internet chat client that makes their
source available and one of the things about Colloquy is
that it has a plug-in API with a lot of different plug-ins
and plug-ins, these plug-ins don't have any dependencies
on each other and they don't compile a whole lot of files.
They're doing more of the sort of
steps that aren't parallelized already.
So they're a really great case to take
advantage of Parallel Target Builds.
So I've got a simple project here which just builds
a few of their plug-ins and I'm going to go ahead
and open up the build results and
show you how this works right now.
If I click build, you can see it's building the
first plug-in here which is a support plug-in.
Now it's building the next and the next, then the
next and when this one's checking it's dependencies,
the next one hasn't started yet, they're
all building in serial right now.
What happens if I clean this out, go back and if
I go to my project menu and edit project settings,
this will open up our project info window, there's
a little checkbox here, shows, let me zoom in on,
called build independent targets in parallel.
All I have to do is click this one checkbox, close
the project settings, open my build results back up
and let's see what happens when I build this again.
See all that going on in parallel?
Each target is building while the
other targets are building.
I'm not waiting for one to finish.
That went by really quickly.
Let me show you that again.
Boom. Five of them at once, six of them
at once, they're all going and we're done.
Parallel Target Builds.
If you can straighten out your dependencies or have
targets where you don't have dependencies between them
that aren't expressed, turn it on and you can
see a big improvement in your build times.
( applause )
>> Thanks Rick.
Have I mentioned that your dependencies have to
be rock solid in order to really use this feature?
We're expecting a whole lot of support calls on you know, I
turned on parallel targets and my project failed to build.
You really have to make sure your dependencies are
rock solid before you turn on parallel targets.
Also, it won't necessarily do much if
you have a typical application project
that is very heavy on the source code files.
It's not, it's only going to parallelize
the steps that are currently choke points.
If you have something that's very
heavy on source code compilation,
you're probably using all the processor you've got anyway.
Can I have the slides back please?
Now parallel targets is going to be used
best with our distributed build features.
Distributed build features let you go beyond the
four or eight processors that are in one machine
and use as many processors as you can find in
the local area or on a dedicated build farm.
It's always a trade off because you have to spend
the time preparing the files and shipping them
over to the other machines and so on certain kinds of files
you know, short C files, you're not going to gain as much
by letting another machine do the work for you as you
will in preparing, sending and receiving the results.
But if you're compiling a lot of C++ files that
are computationally intense, then using other machines
to do your builds for you, can
really improve your build speeds.
We have two basic ways to do distributed builds on Xcode.
One is called shared workgroup builds and it's for casual
ad hawk, just using what other resources are around.
A couple of machines in your office
or that guy who's gone to lunch.
Dedicated network builds is more for
setting up a build farm of machines
that your whole workgroup is going
to use that everybody can share.
The way shared workgroup builds works is it uses a
common UNIX tool called distcc, to distribute jobs.
Because distcc works best when you're just sending a single
file at at time, what we do is we take your source code file
and we pre-process it so we get one .i file.
We send the one .i file using UNIX pipes
over the network, to the volunteer machine,
it builds it and then sends back the .o files.
It's just a one time eyes closed transaction.
There's no persistent state.
One file goes across, one file comes back.
That's why it's really good for casual set up,
just whatever machine happens to be available.
If machines come and go, we don't
mind, we just pick another machine.
We actually use Bonjour to browse
local resources to set it up
At some point though you spend too much time on your
host machine preparing, preprocessing and shipping
out these files and taking them back, than you actually
get benefit of the other machines compiling them.
That's why shared workgroup builds is really
good for you know, under five other machines,
it can speed up certain builds but if you you
know, you try to connect to six or more machines,
it's just not going to improve your build times that much.
To do that you need dedicated network builds and
dedicated network builds uses a different architecture.
First you pre-configure the hosts you're
going to use by host name or IP address
and really those tend to be dedicated machines.
They can be Xserves, they can be Mac minis
sitting on a rack in a room and they're configured
to be optimal compilation systems
and they're not doing anything else.
Second is we map in a file system, a shared file system
so that the volunteer machines can get at your prefix file
and your precompiled header file and any other
resources you're using so all we have to ship
across is the source code file and they can come back to the
shared file system and get any other resources they need.
If all of the volunteer systems are
going to one shared system to pick up
or map in the same precompiled header file, then it's a lot
faster than to send the preprocessed files over every time.
So it scales much, much better and it's much
better if you have a rack and centralized machine.
Now a caveat right now in both Xcode
2.5 Leopard Developer Preview
and Xcode 3.0 Leopard Developer Preview,
neither shared workgroup builds nor
dedicated network builds is actually working.
It's working in the shipping Xcode 2.4.1
on Tiger and we will have both
of these shipping and working really well.
We're working with a couple of our key partners
to make this sing for the Leopard final release.
But due to a couple of other things,
they're both not working right now.
You can look at the user interfaces and see
what we're going to ship in the Leopard final,
but they're not working right, right yet.
Okay, we've covered a lot of project configuration,
we've covered building for different architectures,
we've covered optimizing for speed, now
you want to build your project bigger.
You want to build more complex projects, you want to build
more intricate projects and you need to customize them.
Customization is the most interesting thing
you can do with the Xcode build system,
because that's where the power of
all these build settings comes in.
And I'm not going to go through the hundreds of build
settings we have that allow you to customize your project,
but I'm going to focus on a couple of the new ones that
make things a lot easier on Xcode 3.0.
We're going to talk about some new build
settings to build embedded frameworks,
we're going to talk about the SDK root build setting that
allows you to build against software development kits
and we're going to talk about building the same
project against multiple versions of Xcode as well
as building gnu-based projects using the core gnu tools,
especially now that the developer
tools folder is self contained.
So let's start with applications with embedded frameworks.
This is the Mac OS X way of packaging software.
We talk about this in the very basic introductory materials.
We talk about it in how you structure an application.
Don't install shared libraries on the
machine, don't give users a package of stuff.
Embed your frameworks, embed your subsidiary
code as frameworks inside your application.
Yet it's surprisingly difficult to set that up in Xcode.
We were talking to our technical writer about it
when we were explaining this feature and he said,
you just cut a page and a half out of the manual.
Because it's a lot of work right now.
You have to run an auxiliary tool to set up
the installation path of the dynamic library,
the framework, so that the application can find it.
Well we've added a new build setting into the Xcode
build settings called Dynamic Library Install Name
and you set this on any framework that you build,
that's going to be embedded in an application
and you set it's value to this special path
@executable_path means what was launched,
.. means go up past the Mac OS folder, frameworks
means oh the frameworks directory of that executable
and then EXECUTABLE_PATH is how you get to me from there.
And that means every, when your application links
against your framework and your framework's loaded,
the framework will know hey, this is my load
location and I can be invoked from the application.
On the application target, all you have to do is take
the built framework build product from the other target
or project and copy it into your applications frameworks
directory in the path that's indicated there and that's it.
You don't have to invoke lib tool, you don't
have to run a separate install name tool,
it's all set up there in one build setting.
It's going to be much more convenient.
( applause )
Now there are some cases where you
want to build a framework that is used
by multiple applications or maybe put in multiple locations.
You don't want to hard coat it to being up
and over from the application executable
because it may be used in different places.
Well the Linux community has long had this thing
called rpath and we have it in Mac OS X now in dyld
and rpath is a Runpath Search Paths
facility that allows a dynamic library to say,
you can find me relative to any of your known search paths.
So using Runpath Search Paths when
you build an embedded framework,
you just say my dynamic library install
name is @rpath/my path.
So it's whoever's using me, whoever linked to me,
can find me via their rpaths according to my name.
And then in each client that you
build against that framework,
you simply say the Run Set Path Search Paths are well here's
my executable and I'm going to put in the frameworks folder
or if another application wants to put it in
a shared location like we do this with Xcode,
we put all of our frameworks in a library
folder relative to the Xcode executable.
And so we find all our frameworks that
way, via that Runpath Search Paths.
So this is a very powerful facility to ship a
suite of applications or tools that all share a set
of common libraries and can all find them very easily.
And to demo that I'm going to turn that over to Rick again.
>> So I'm going to start out by showing
you what Chris first showed you,
simple use of the new dynamic library
install name build setting.
I should mention this is only available
in Xcode 3.0 so you need to wait
until you can move entirely to
Xcode 3.0 before you can adopt it.
But here I've got a framework and a self
contained application that wants to link
against this framework and embed
it in it's application bundle.
So that it's a completely removable, relocatable application.
So I've got a cross-project dependency
on my framework project.
My target for my application depends on my framework target.
I link against it, it's red because I
haven't built it yet and I actually copy it
into my applications frameworks
directory using a copy files build phase.
Well how did I set up this framework target?
If I go and look at it's build settings, filtered
for the new dynamic library install name,
you can see here that the dynamic library install name
for my framework is @executable_path/../
Frameworks/the EXECUTABLE_PATH build setting
which resolves to the name of frameworks
dyLib binary inside it's wrapper.
So when I go ahead and build my self contained application
here, it's building right now, if I go and take a look
at it, here's my built application, I'm going to look at
it in the finder because when you run within Xcode,
Xcode helps your applications find things in your own
build products directory with a little dyld magic.
So we're going to run them from the finder so that we can
be absolutely sure that we have our linking set up right
and that we're not relying on the
crutches that Xcode gives us.
Here I've got my application I just built, I can take a look
inside with the show package contents contextual menu item
and you can see that there's a frameworks directory in
this application and it's got my framework embedded in it.
When I run the application it links or runs
rather and if I drag it somewhere else,
since it's got the framework it needs
embedded inside it, it still runs.
The disadvantage of this current approach here is
that if I want to use that framework somewhere else,
some client which doesn't embed it at the main executable/
../frameworks relative to itself,
I'd have to add some run script phase,
run some extra tool, do some other magic
or build a different version of that framework.
I shouldn't have to build that framework twice.
See what happens with that fixed framework app, which it
instead of embedding the framework, for whatever purpose,
wants to put it in a /library in it's
own location and link against it there.
Well if I build this application and I go take a look at
it in the finder, if I launch it it crashes immediately
with some obscure dyld error about
not being able to load the framework.
Well the easiest way to fix this is to adopt Runpath
search paths and I'm going to show you how to do that.
First I'm going to go to my framework target, inspect it's
build settings and I'm just going to search for Runpath
and see there's a new Runpath Search Paths build setting
and it can have multiple values, in this case I'm sorry,
I won't actually set the dynamic
library install name on this target,
so right now it's set to the
@executable_path based value.
I'm just going to get rid of all this that tells
whoever links against it where to find it
and say find me wherever you want
to with your Runpath Search Paths.
So now the dynamic library install name of my
framework is just @rpath/the rest of my path.
Go ahead and commit that.
Now I'm going to go to my application here and this is where in
it's build settings, oops going to double click on the target,
going to filter on Runpath Search Paths, here I can
give it a value of well in this case I want that rpath
to be still @executable_path/../Frameworks,
so I can just type that in oops,
little Xcode 3.0 bug, build my self contained application
and see I can still move it, it still launches just fine,
even thought it's framework didn't specify
the full dynamic library install name anymore,
it used the Runpath Search Paths
in the self contained application.
Let's go over and look at my fixed framework app.
Well it also need to specify where to find that framework.
It's going to find it in a different location.
So I'm just going to go to my copy files phase here,
which is where I specified where to put the framework,
I'm going to copy that and put that in as a
Runpath Search Path for this application.
Let's go ahead and build this, take
a look at it here and now it launches
because it's using it's Runpath Search Paths
to find the framework where it copied it.
There's a lot more you can do with rpaths,
it's a very powerful and useful tool.
At the very least it can help you organize
how you link to things even if you don't need
to use it for it's more complicated affordances.
I highly encourage you to check it out.
One thing to keep in mind again, this is a new Leopard
feature, so you need to wait until you can adopt,
you can use Leopard as your minimum
platform before you can use rpaths.
Back to you Chris.
>> Thank you Rick.
( applause )
So using embedded frameworks is one of the things that we
exhort you to do which we've made it more difficult to use
in Xcode than it ought to be and we're
making easier in Xcode 3.0.
Another one of those is using SDKs.
We told you from the time of the universal transition
that you should always target SDKs rather than building
against the content of your native system.
It's going to make it a lot easier for you
to be portable from one system to another,
to build from one platform on another platform.
It's actually a very crucial part of
our strategy of having multiple copies
of the development environment on one machine.
But there's a little problem.
Is that we support only one SDK and a lot of people have
said well that's not SDKs, the whole purpose of SDKs is
to blend them together and so one of the very common
things that happens is well you have an application,
you want to build it against the 10.4u SDK because
that's the way to build universal software for Tiger,
but you want to use the Omni frameworks and
the Omni frameworks come in their own SDK.
They have their own path from library
frameworks and all their frameworks in them.
Well with Xcode you have to choose one or another.
You have to install the Omni frameworks in your system
and then build against the root, the current system
or you can choose to build against the SDK and lose out on
the Omni frameworks or you can do something really skanky
like trying to install the Omni
frameworks into your 10.4u SDK
and create your own custom franken SDK
and people don't do that and I'm glad.
But in Xcode 3.0, we fixed that.
The SDK root build setting, the system
SDK build setting, now accepts a list.
A list of paths and one of those paths can
be the Apple SDK, the system SDK and another
of those path can be any other SDK that happens to have
libraries, frameworks and headers that you build against
and then when you go to build, Xcode blends those together
into a composite SDK and compiles and links your application
against that and it'll do that for every
target that uses that combination of SDKs.
So it only happens once.
This makes it very easy for you to use
third party SDKs as well as an Apple SDK
like the 10.4u universal SDK
or the Leopard 10.5 SDK.
You can even create your own SDK,
it's very easily to be used this way.
All you have to do is take your software the builds
into what's called the dest root, the destination root
and that will look like slash with library or
applications or wherever you want to install your things
and you call that root you know my.sdk.
You take the executables in it and you strip them with
strip -c which takes away all of the executable code
but leaves all the symbols for linking behind
and then you take away everything else that's
not your header files and the strip executables.
You put in one file at the top level called SDKSetting.plist
and all it has to have is one key value pair
of the name of your SDK so that can show in the pop
up list and then any build settings that you choose
to have in effect when your SDK is in use.
If you have a build settings dictionary
in your SDKSettings.plist,
those build settings will be preset automatically
when somebody choose your SDK even
if it's blended with an Apple SDK.
So we hope that those of you who vend frameworks for
other developers to use will take advantage of this
and those of you who want to use those frameworks
can now very easily use third-party SDKs along
with the Apple SDKs when building your software.
One last thing.
We talked this morning and we talked on Monday
about the self contained developer folder.
The self contained developer folder for Xcode 3.0
and the self contained developer folder
for Xcode 2.5 and how Xcode uses everything
in that self contained folder to make it portable.
Well one important thing about that is that includes
all of the standard gnu development tool chain
that usually is installed in the system root.
You can see the theme here.
We're trying to get you independent
from installing things in slash
so that you can have your whole development
environment in a separate location and be very portable.
One of the things we do is we take, we put in the
developer folder our own usr directory slash user
and it has /usr/include and usr/bin and those
have all of the header files and all of the tools
and all of the link libraries that are normally
only installed by a developer tool installation.
They're all there in the self contained developer folder.
The good news is when you launch Xcode, we map everything
so that we use the compiler and the linker and the debugger
and the standard C library and the link
libraries and the system headers and everything,
from the developer tools folders copy as slash
user rather than from root and when you're building
with Xcode 2.5, even on the
Leopard system, we do the same thing.
So when you launch Xcode 2.5 on a Leopard system,
you're not touching Leopard's slash user directory at all.
You're using everything from Xcode 2.5's
usr/bin, user included directory.
That gives you some integrity.
That keeps you from mixing and
matching Tiger and Leopard components.
That's really important but, that's
done automatically by Xcode.
If you go beyond the bounds of that, if you're doing gnu
style development, if you're doing Makefile development,
if you're invoking things from the command line, if you have
shell scripts that invoke Makefiles and refer to things
in usr/bin, usr/lib, usr/include
directly, you need to adapt to that.
Because if somebody picks up and moves your developer folder
or if somebody doesn't install the tools
in slash, then those are going to fail.
So you need to know how these are laid out
and what special things to do with them.
Here are a couple of important pointers.
The first thing is, how many of you use gcc_select?
You may stop now.
( laughter )
For a couple of reasons.
One is when you have multiple developer folders and
multiple sets of tools, gcc_select is ambiguous.
What am I selecting and for whom. The best way we figured
to eliminate that ambiguity was to eliminate gcc_select
and just say, if you're using Xcode, you
specify the compiler you want to use by default
in Xcode's compiler rules pane and if you're
using Makefile or gnu development tools,
you have to specify which compiler you're
using, by compiler name and path rather
than just having some mystical system setting that sets
up simlinks and assuming you'll get the right answer.
We don't think it's going to be that much trouble to
migrate to it, especially since the second thing is
that there's only one compiler to select
among which is GCC 4.0.1.
There is one compiler installed by Xcode 3.0.
There is one compiler installed by Xcode 2.5.
That's GCC 4.0.1.
If you want to develop for 10.3.9, you
have to install an optional install package
and that includes the 10.3.9
SDK and the GCC 3.3 compiler.
So really there's nothing to select among unless
you're specifically doing pre-Tiger development.
Then you get the 10.3.9 SDK and you get GCC 3.3
and then you have to use GCC 3.3 either
with the rules pane or by specifying it explicitly in your
Makefile's compilerpath, your CC setting in your Makefile.
Now there's one special thing.
We try very hard to keep from mixing Tiger
and Leopard content on a Leopard system.
Leopard content will never be installed
on a Tiger system, it wouldn't work.
It would blow up.
Tiger content is only installed on the
Leopard system in the 2.5 folder
with one exceptions and that's GCC 3.3.
There is no Leopard GCC 3.3, there's only a Tiger
GCC 3.3 and so if you install GCC 3.3
on a Tiger of a Leopard system,
it always goes into /usr/bin.
It doesn't go into the /usr/bin in the developer folder.
So that's one thing you don't have to worry about.
There's only one GCC 3.3 and it's only available
in the 10.3.9 development support package.
Now I said that there's one GCC 4.0,
GCC 4.0.1, well there's a twist.
There are different GCC 4.0.1s
for Tiger and Leopard.
They have different build numbers and different
features, different compatibility, different performance,
different errors and warnings, different bug fixes.
They are different compilers.
But they both report themselves as GCC 4.0.1.
So just a little warning.
If you want to report a bug against GCC, please
specify the build number from GCC -v,
don't just say GCC 4.0.1,
because well we've got a couple of them.
Okay? If you want to have as I said, you own
make files or your own shell script build phases,
have access to specific tools even though you
have a portable Xcode DEVELOPER_DIRectory,
we've provided a few build settings to make
that easy and Rick's going to demo them.
>> We've got a really simple Makefile base, really,
really simple Makefile-based project here which compiles
one source file and it uses a C compiler
that it specifies with an absolute path.
In the past, on OS X, you've been able to assume
that the compiler is at an absolute path in /usr/bin,
but the linker isn't in absolute path in /usr/bin
and that all the tools are in absolute path.
Say goodbye to absolute paths if you want
to opt in to using the developer tools
out of you're currently running
Xcode version's developer folder.
It's entirely optional, the command line support is on by
default in the installer, so your run script build phases
and Makefiles can continue to invoke
tools at a /usr/bin if they want.
But if you want to opt in to using the Xcode 2.5 tools
when your project is built with 2.5, even on Leopard
or opt into letting people turn off the command line
support package so they have no compiler tools in /usr/bin
and still be able to build your project, then there
a few simple modifications that you should make
to your Makefiles, and run script build phases and so
forth, to invoke things out of the developer /user/dir.
So first of all we're going to get rid of this absolute path.
What are we going to put in it's place?
Well when Xcode invokes your Makefiles and run script
phases, it prepends the path environment variable
with the path to the DEVELOPER_BIN_DIR. So I could do that,
I could specify no path at all, just the name of the tool
and since I'm being built inside Xcode, it'll find
the version in my developer /usr/bin directory first.
Or I could use one of the new build settings we provided
which is called DEVELOPER_BIN_DIR. So this is passed
in the environment and if I make my tool
invocation relative to it, I'll invoke GCC 4.0
out of my DEVELOPER_BIN_DIR. So let's open up the build
results here and see what happens when I build this.
Oops, this machine doesn't have zooming on.
Well you may not be able to read this at
the moment, but it's invoking GCC 4.0
out of /developer/usr/bin GCC 4.0,
instead of out of /usr/bin GCC 4.0.
What that means is that if I move this project over to 2.5,
it should invoke 2.5's version of GCC 4.0.
That's pretty easy to test because I've installed Xcode
2.5 on this machine, it's available as a download
from the developer.apple.com website.
It's a pre-release.
I can just go ahead on Leopard, launch Xcode 2.5,
here it is running side by side with Xcode 3.0
and I can open my project in Xcode 2.5.
Now before I build this, there's something I've forgotten
which is my Makefile is building
against the system headers.
But as soon as I move over to building with Tiger's tools,
I don't have Tiger system headers on my Leopard system.
There are all the Tiger developer tools headers
and libraries inside the Xcode 2.5 folder,
but what I really need to do is build against an SDK to
get the rest of the system headers for my Tiger system.
So when I go ahead and build this project,
you're going to see oops, should clean first,
you're going to see that I get an
obscure error from the linker.
So what I'm going to do is when you're compiling from the
command line with a Makefile, use the -isysroot flag,
which is documented in the GCC man page
to specify the SDK you want to specify.
In the past I might have said isysroot /Developer
oops, /Developer/SDKs/MacOSX 10.4u.sdk,
but that will build against the SDK out of /Developer.
I might not have an SDK in /Developer, I might
have chosen to install my tools elsewhere and besides,
/Developer is my 3.0 developer tools folder.
Instead, I'm going to use another one of the
new environment variables we passed down,
the DEVELOPER_SDK_DIR. So I'm passing -isysroot
$/MacOSX10.4u.sdk.
This is going to make me build against the SDK out
of my Xcode 2.5 folder, wherever that may be.
On different people's systems if
they install it in different places,
it'll find GCC and my SDK in the right place.
Let's go ahead and build and you can see that
my build is succeeded using 2.5 on Leopard.
So the important things to remember always build against
SDKs, whether you're using a Makefile based project
or a native project, also requires that you build against an
SDK if you build with 2.5 on Leopard or you choose not
to install the command line support, in
which case you won't have system headers.
Build against an SDK and don't use absolute paths.
Use DEVELOPER_BIN_DIR and there's some others which are in
the documentation like DEVELOPER_DIR and /Developer/usr/dir
to find the tools that you want to invoke, to invoke them
out of the self contained developer
directory, wherever that may be.
Back to you Chris.
>> Thanks Rick.
( applause )
Well it's been a longish tour through a lot of intricate
details of the build system, but let's summarize.
We've got new build system support
for building 64-bit.
There's a lot of power behind the checkboxes that
just turn on the architecture's build setting.
We've got new predefined build settings to
help you build fat for your release builds,
but build as fast as possible thin for your debug builds.
We've got several useful techniques we've shown you for
managing precompiled headers, for using parallels and write
and for using distributed builds
in order to speed up your builds.
We've shown you some useful new build settings for building
embedded framework so that you can actually use Xcode
to build software the way we tell you to and some techniques
for building using multiple SDKs
and multiple versions of the tools.
We really hope that you'll be able to take these,
apply them using Xcode 3.0
to build better software faster.
For more information, Matt Formica has been
around all week as your Developer Tools Evangelist,
there's plenty of documentation in both the Xcode
2.5 and the 3.0 drops.
I strongly recommend that you open up the new
documentation viewer in Xcode 3.0,
browse around inside the developer tool documentation.
There's a gold mine of information there.